Yvonne Chung
Dr. Carpenter
Romanticism Final
17 December 2014
Why Dreams Are Significant in Romantic Poetry
        Dreams are not unique to humans, yet they are a mysterious phenomenon. We still do not know exactly why we dream, how our brains produce those visions in our dreams, or what particular dreams might signify. Romantic poetry places a lot of emphasis on dreams for a number of reasons. Romantics were concerned with the mind, the imagination, finding the truth, and breaking through to the other side of reality. This other side is where everything takes its ideal form, and the world is a better place. Many Romantic poets were emotionally unstable, lived very troubled lives, and were prone to melancholy and despair. Be that as it may, they have produced some of the most remarkable works in these moments of depression. Romantics see the world with all its atrocities and injustices, and try to explain why things are the way they are. Dreams are significant and show up frequently in Romantic poetry because given that the world is so often this terrible place full of greedy, power-hungry, selfish people, the visions that the mind produces prove to be the only gateway into a more agreeable world.
        William Blake claimed to have broken through to the ideal realm, and he did indeed have many visions, which he tried to encapsulate in his engravings. Many of his poems had elements of dreams and visions. He describes his visions of dining with Isaiah and Ezekiel in “The Marriage of Heaven and Hell,” and he also has conversations with the Devil in his “Memorable Fancies.” Blake thought that there were four states of the human soul: Eden, Beulah, Generation, and Ulro. Most of us spend our time in Generation, but sometimes our visions can take us to Beulah, and Eden is only achieved when the poet or artist creates. Dreams, then, are necessary for both creation and for imagining the self in Beulah.
        Wordsworth describes a number of visions in “The Prelude,” the most eminent of which being the one from “Book Fifth,” titled, “Books.” This dream is founded on Descartes’ dream, but Wordsworth found it significant enough to write about it. The speaker is reading Don Quixote when he falls asleep and dreams of meeting an “Arab of the Bedouin tribes” (77) in the middle of a desert. The Arab has a shell and a book. The shell predicts the end of the world via a giant flood, and the Arab says he is going to preserve the book by burying it. He then rides off on his camel, leaving the speaker alone before he wakes from the dream. Wordsworth did not seem to have many visions of his own, but others’ dreams and the dreams of his own characters almost always lead to some kind of revelation.
        Because Coleridge was high on opium for most of his adult life, the various visions that he managed to write down turned out to be quite interesting. One of Coleridge’s most notable visions is the one he describes in “Kubla Khan: A Vision in a Dream. A Fragment.” He sees “an Abyssinian maid” (39) who plays on her “dulcimer” (40) and sings of “Mount Abora” (41). He desires to “revive within” himself  her symphony and song. He says this would bring him much delight. Dreams then, serve not only as a way to escape the harsh reality of the universe, but also as a source of inspiration. Coleridge bought into the idea that an ideal world was possible, as he spoke of a “Pantisocracy,” though he could never pull it off. Perhaps dreams helped him go to a place more like his utopia.
        Shelley was also a platonic idealist, believing that the world was largely an illusion, that the real reality is where the ideal forms of things exist in their own ideal realm. We have to use imagination, and imagination only, to access this place. As he says in “Hymn to Intellectual Beauty,” music and moonlight give “grace and truth to life’s unquiet dream” (6). An unquiet dream is a nightmare, so in other words, Shelley considered the world a very bad dream, but beautiful things like music and moonlight can make life more bearable. However, Shelley became despondent very quickly because he knew that human knowledge is limited and that we could never access these ideal forms. Like most other Romantic poets, Shelley saw the world as a dark, unintelligible reality and thus used dreams to find solace. In “Adonais” he imagines that Keats is in a better place now that he is dead, and this comforts him. 
        Byron’s “Darkness” describes his “dream, which was not all a dream” (1) about the end of the world. Byron was the most cynical of the Romantics; he even despised them all except for Shelley. He believed that life was ultimately meaningless, and as a result he used a lot of satire and humor to cover up these thoughts. Dreams were important to Byron because they were a means of giving at least some enjoyment to an otherwise dull, purposeless life. In “Darkness,” the sun, moon, and stars go out, the animals go insane, war starts up again, and people do everything they can possibly do to survive for as long as they can, but nothing works. Dark as this half-dream thing is, it has an air of satire to it. Byron’s dream criticizes humanity’s complete abstraction from loyalty and altruism when survival is at stake. For Byron, dreams were both an escape from the cruel world and a source of inspiration for his poetic satire on humanity.
        Keats, like Wordsworth, seldom described visions and dreams of his own, but his poetic figures sometimes had dreams, and they always serve a purpose. In “The Fall of Hyperion,” Keats starts off saying “Fanatics have their dreams” (1), implying that all people dream, even the fanatics. Moreover, “The Eve of St. Agnes” describes an actual practice people used to do, and might still do. More specifically, if a woman goes to bed without supper on the eve of St. Agnes, and lies on her back, she will dream of her future husband. This poem puts us in mind of Romeo and Juliet, only it has a happy ending. The female protagonist, Madeline, follows the ritual and does indeed dream of Porphyro, unbeknownst to the fact that Porphyro is actually in the room with her. That Madeline actually does dream of her future husband suggests that our minds are in fact trying to show us useful things in our dreams. Without the dream being successful, Madeline would likely have been angry at Porphyro for disturbing her before she could see her future husband. She had to see him in the dream before she could fully commit to believing that she and Porphyro were meant to be.
        Every human dreams, and these altered states of consciousness are an area of great interest to the Romantics precisely because they are altered states. Blake, Wordsworth, Coleridge, Shelley, Byron, and Keats all found fault with reality and sought to liberate their imaginations as a means to escape it. Furthermore, they felt like the human experience was heavily limited by society’s established conventions, and since dreams and fantasies are an indication of a free, uninhibited mind, they focused on and drew meaning from their dreams or the dreams of others. As hard as it tries, society can never put chains around a person’s dreams or imagination, so to poets and artists, dreams are extremely important and worth paying attention to.