Yvonne Chung
Dr. Carpenter
Romanticism Final
17 December 2014
Why “To Nature” is Considered Romantic
        “To Nature” is considered Romantic because the Romantics praised the transcendental power of nature and the value of a pastoral lifestyle. The speaker in “To Nature” is very appreciative of things found in nature, and quite adamant about wanting to live among it. He says that the “leaves and flowers” (4) that surround him contain “lessons of love and earnest piety” (5). In other words, natural things serve as great teachers to human beings. He says that he tries to draw forth “Deep, heartfelt, inward joy” (3) from “all created things” (2). In the speaker’s perspective, though, everything is created because he believes in a God that is found among nature. He addresses nature in the last few lines of the poem, “Thee only God! and thou shalt not despise / Even me, the priest of this poor sacrifice” (13-14). The speaker’s adamancy shows through when he says he does not care what the rest of the world thinks of his belief. He is steadfast in his piety to the God in nature and nothing else has any importance to him. He says that “if the wide world rings / In mock of this belief, it brings / Nor fear, nor grief, nor vain perplexity” (6-8). He will not fear these others, will not stop believing in the divinity of nature, and will not be moved. That being said, he claims that he will “build my altar in the fields, / And the blue sky my fretted dome shall be” (9-10). The only roof over his head will be the sky, because then he would truly be living in nature, experiencing all the powerful forces of it. Instead of burning incense like many other religious practices involve, the “sweet fragrance that the flower yields / Shall be the incense I will yield to Thee” (11-12).         However, the speaker seems to recognize that nature is very hard to please, because he says “thou shalt not despise / Even me” (13-14). He knows nature despises most things, but to this particularly pious individual, “the priest of this poor sacrifice” (14), he wants nature to look upon kindly. It is interesting that he uses “thou shalt not” (13) when addressing his God. It places some doubt on his real level of piousness, as he is using a common line from religious commandments that followers of that religion are supposed to observe without question. He says in the first line that “it may indeed be phantasy” (1) when he attempts to draw joy from all created things and to learn lessons of love and piety from the leaves and flowers around him.
        This poem is considered romantic because the speaker commends nature, prefers to live in it over society, wants to liberate himself by departing from the rest of the world even if others mock him, and because it has an element of the imagination in it. A “phantasy” (1) is something that the mind comes up with, something that is imagined when the mind is unrestrained. Much like the speaker Byron’s “Darkness,” who is not sure if his vision is a dream, the speaker in “To Nature” is unsure whether the joy that he acquires from nature is real or not. This suggests that there are multiple realms, and that some, presumably the ideal one, are only accessible through the human mind and the development of our imagination.