Yvonne Chung
Dr. Carpenter
Romanticism
01 October 2014
The Import of Memory in Wordsworth’s “Lines Composed a Few Miles Above Tintern Abbey”
        Memory is at once fundamental and ubiquitous among humankind, making it an intriguing area of study, yet there is still much about the subject that has not been discovered. The Romantics of the 18th and 19th centuries sought universal truths regarding nature and the human mind, using poetry as their medium. One such poet is William Wordsworth, whose conception of the poet, as he states in “Preface to Lyrical Ballads,” is a person who has “a disposition to be affected more than other men by absent things as if they were present” (602). Likewise, as part of his well-known definition of poetry, Wordsworth maintains that a large part of poetry is emotion recollected in tranquility. Wordsworth deals quite extensively with memory in a number of his poems, one of which being “Lines Composed a Few Miles Above Tintern Abbey.” In this poem, Wordsworth revisits the banks of the River Wye five years after he first came upon the area. By disclosing a personal experience regarding nature and its effects on him, Wordsworth illustrates the importance of memory in assisting those who seek to more deeply understand the sublime power of nature.
        Wordsworth uses a lot of diction pertaining to memory and nature in order to create an image of the place he is revisiting. Wordsworth often repeats the words “again” and “once again” in the first stanza, where he describes the things he perceives with his senses upon his second visit. He first notices the noise, remarking “again I hear / These waters, rolling from their mountain-springs / With a soft inland murmur” (2-4). Next, he presents what he sees with “Once again / Do I behold these steep and lofty cliffs” (4-5) and “Once again I see / These hedge-rows” (14-15). And finally, when describing what he does in the area, he says “The day is come when I again repose / Here, under this dark sycamore” (9-10). The repeated usage of these words indicates that he is constantly recalling experiences, sights, and sounds from his first trip and comparing them with those of this trip. Memory thus allows him to do as poets are wont to do. Wordsworth recollects his memories of the area from five years ago, and his mind stitches those memories together with his current perceptions to create an image of the area as he sees it in the present moment. By weaving in words pertaining to nature with those referring to his own recollections and present perceptions, Wordsworth suggests that nature and humans are ultimately connected and that memory plays a crucial role in helping a person become one, or as close as possible to one, with nature.
        Like nature, memory has a transcendent quality because it allows humans to keep a record of our experiences with nature and it can be called upon at any time. In the second stanza, Wordsworth tells of how, during “hours of weariness” (27) in the city, his spirit has often turned to the “sylvan Wye” (57). Due to his memories of that first visit, he has been able to experience “tranquil restoration” (30) and feel “sensations sweet” (27) amid the clamor “of towns and cities” (26). He says that this area and his memories of it have given him an even more sublime gift: a “serene and blessed mood” (41) in the face of “this unintelligible world” (40) and all the terrible things in it. To him nature is more than just a source of happiness and pleasure, it disturbs him “with the joy / Of elevated thoughts” (94-95). The “beauteous forms” (22) of the Wye, and by extension nature, help him “see into the life of things” (49). That is to say, in addition to bringing hope and happiness, being in nature allows a person to experience something deeper; a kind of separation from the body in the process of becoming “a living soul” (46). In the third stanza Wordsworth switches to the present moment, remarking that even though his recognitions had grown faint, his mind is revived upon revisiting. Although Wordsworth feels a sense of loss at the dichotomy between his memory and the actual scene before him, his mind is renewed upon his revisit and he feels the “unremembered pleasure” again (31). Nature gives him hope because he sees in it “life and food / For future years” (64-65). In describing how well nature was able to revive “the picture of the mind” again, Wordsworth effectively delivers the idea that, in terms of our attempts to seek universal truths and to understand nature, it might actually be better to rely on our memory of nature rather than to have the experience of being in nature for the first time. This, however, is where the darker undertones of the poem begin to emerge, as Wordsworth goes on to tell of his gradual and perplexing separation from nature (61).
        As a child Wordsworth was one with nature, as he grew older he started to see nature as a separate entity but he still loved her, and now he is aware of and dreads the possibility of being estranged from nature. At the close of the second stanza and the start of the third, Wordsworth’s tone shifts to one of anxiety and dejection. Up until this point in the poem, he has been commending the natural world as being something that heals and restores people, but he now mentions the three stages of separation from nature that he experienced growing up. Wordsworth recalls that as a child he was more “like a man / Flying from something that he dreads than one / Who sought the thing he loved,” meaning that he followed wherever nature led, still unaware that nature is a separate entity (70-72). As he grew older, Wordsworth felt an estrangement from both nature and his childhood, conceding that “For nature then / [...] / Was all in all. —I cannot paint / What then I was” (72, 75-76). He recognizes that he is no longer the child who was once able to love nature so absolutely. Wordsworth acknowledges that “That time is past, / And all its aching joys are now no more,” and now dreads the passage of time as it possibly leads to a complete separation with nature (82-83). Even so, he accepts the changes in his relationship with nature, having learned “To look on nature, not as in the hour / Of thoughtless youth; but hearing oftentimes / The still, sad music of humanity” (89-91). Wordsworth’s memory plays an important role in these three phases of change. He had to remember that he once loved nature without anxiety to become aware of the fact that he can no longer do so.
        Despite the inevitable separation with nature that comes with time and especially with living in a city, Wordsworth says he still loves nature and all the things on this earth that his senses “half create” and half perceive (106). Here Wordsworth is emphasizing memory’s essential role in guiding the way people view the world. Humans half create and half perceive nature because, building upon prior memory, we choose what our senses present to us. In effect, nature is more than just how we perceive it, it is also created by how we remember it, and this creation is a linking together of different memories of nature such that it provides the person with one holistic perception of the world. This, presumably, is the reason why Wordsworth’s first visit to these banks meant so much to him; he had no memory of it before. Everything he perceived then was created by his own mind and imagination. The sensory overstimulation actually served to distract him from reaching that feeling of enlightenment and connectedness with nature that is so rarely experienced in life. This is also the reason why Wordsworth feels so much joy when he notices that Dorothy, upon her first visit, is behaving just as he had behaved upon his first visit.
        Wordsworth reveals in the fourth stanza that Dorothy is on the tour with him, and he expresses his hope for her to remember this moment of them on the banks together so that the memory can later heal her of “solitude, or fear, or pain, or grief” (143). By listening to and watching her, he is able to behold in her, at least for a while, what he “was once” (120). Not only is he able to re-experience the original sensations of being in nature by living vicariously through her, he is also reassured that she will hold this memory of them in this moment on the banks of the Wye. He then prays that she will always be blessed and that her memory will be “a dwelling-place / For all sweet sounds and harmonies” (141-142). He wants her never to fall into the “dreary intercourse of daily life” (131), which would disturb their “cheerful faith” (133) in nature. He hopes that in addition to helping her through life, this memory will serve to remind her of him after he is gone. Upon seeing that Dorothy is just as interested in and amazed by nature as he is, Wordsworth is excited by the notion of his sister revisiting this area in later years and, building on her first memory of it, feeling “a sense sublime / Of something far more deeply interfused” in nature, just as he had (95-96). Because Dorothy was also a poet, Wordsworth emphasizes the importance of poets, in the creation of poetry, to reach this state of understanding which will allow the poet to later recollect memories in tranquility.
        In addition to “Lines Composed a Few Miles Above Tintern Abbey,” Wordsworth demonstrates the importance of memory in a number of others – “Nutting,” “Ode: Intimations of Immortality from Early Recollections of Childhood,” and “The Prelude,” to name a few. As Wordsworth developed as a person and a poet, he clearly came to appreciate human memory not only as something that humans need but as something that serves to help us become the best versions of ourselves. Memory, compounded with imagination, is exactly the kind of thing in which the Romantics would take an interest, particularly since many writers from the Enlightenment exaggerated the capacities of reason and science. Moreover, the ideas proposed by Wordsworth in this poem are still applicable today. We really do, in a sense, both create and perceive the world because everyone has had different memories, which automatically influence our perceptions. And when we are in nature, we still do experience those moments in which we feel we have reached a higher sense of being.
Works Cited
Hollander, John, Harold Bloom, Lionel Trilling, and Frank Kermode. “Lines Composed a Few         Miles Above Tintern Abbey” and “Preface to Lyrical Ballads.” The Oxford Anthology of         English Literature. New York: Oxford UP., 1973. 146-150, 594-611. Print.