Romanticism in Wordsworth’s “Michael”
        The Romantics were fascinated by the human mind, and especially by memory and the imagination. Most Romantics, excepting Blake, were avid proponents of human beings returning to a previous state of connectedness with the natural world, which was to be achieved through the senses and the mind itself. Furthermore, as the Romantics tended to hold quite radical views, they supported the rising up of the common people. Wordsworth, in particular, was known for making ordinary things seem unusual or interesting in his poetry. Among the many pastoral poems in existence, Wordsworth’s “Michael” is notable in terms of its portrayal of Romantic ideas. It has been criticized for being overly sentimental, but it undeniably contains themes that were central to the Romantic attitude. “Michael” is Romantic in its empowerment of the common people, its idealization of nature, its criticism of the city and its encroachment upon rural areas, and in the role memory plays.
        There are two layers to this poem, the first of which is found in the first stanza. Wordsworth says he is going to tell the story behind the “unhewn stones” in the Green-head Ghyll (17). The story, then, is the second layer. Wordsworth describes Michael as an old, poor shepherd with unusual strength, a stout heart, and a keen mind (42-44). We see here the Romantic tendency to exalt the common people. In addition, Wordsworth portrays a very strong sense of community within the neighborhood. As Luke leaves for the city, all the neighbors “Came forth with wishes and farewell prayers, / That followed him till he was out of sight” (429-430). Due to living in close proximity to nature his entire life, Michael has developed a deep appreciation of and connection with nature, to the point of having “learned the meaning of all winds” (48). This is a very Romantic quality; to be old yet still very much connected to nature, albeit a different kind of connection than that which a child has to nature. Michael leads a simple life with his wife, Isabel, and his son, Luke, far away from the pestilential influences of urban society. This poem displays a clear dichotomy between those who live simple lives in nature and those who live in the city where temptation and corruption run rampant. The Romantics liked to remain as separate from the city as possible, and, like Michael, had hopes for their children to grow up in close proximity to nature as well. Michael, therefore, is an embodiment of the Romantic ideals.
        Wordsworth describes with much detail the natural imagery surrounding Grasmere Vale where Michael and his family reside in the Evening Star, which came to be known in its neighborhood as “a public symbol of life” (130). Everything but the unfinished sheep-fold in the valley seems to be what the Romantics would consider idyllic; every day, Michael and his healthy son work in the fields while Isabel works on her spinning wheels, and they all deeply love one another and nature. However, Michael finds out he must pay off a debt or be forced to sell the land onto which he has poured his heart and his labor, day after day for over seventy years. The only other option was to send Luke, now eighteen, to work in the city. Before Luke leaves, Michael tells him he will always love him unconditionally, and he expresses his wish for Luke to one day come back and finish the sheep-fold. For now, he has Luke place one stone to represent the entrance into a covenant with Michael. Unfortunately, Luke is unable to overcome the “evil courses” of the city and is driven “To seek a hiding-place beyond the seas” (445, 447). In the face of loss, Michael continues with his labor because of how much the land meant to him. It was, to Michael, “The pleasure which there is in life itself” (77). Because the Romantics so often dealt with existentialism in their lives and in their poetry, a considerable part of Romanticism is finding one’s purpose in life, or finding a will to live. For Michael, it was evidently caring for this plot of land because he tells Isabel, “if these fields of ours / Should pass into a stranger’s hand, I think / That I could not lie quiet in my grave” (230-232). As it happens, the cottage is left in ruin after Michael’s and Isabel’s deaths, but the unfinished sheep-fold and the oak tree remain. One of the main ideas of the poem, which is also a major Romantic idea, is that change happens and the world moves on, but there will also always be reminders of what once was.
        Though its role is small, Wordsworth certainly does not neglect the significance of memory in “Michael.” Wordsworth describes the hills Michael “had so often climbed; which had impressed / So many incidents upon his mind / Of hardship, skill or courage, joy or fear” (67-69). This description serves to characterize Michael, indicating his love of nature and his eighty years among it. Alternatively, in their anxiety of having to send their beloved son into the city, Michael and Isabel are comforted and given hope by the memory of Richard Bateman, a parish-boy who “grew wondrous rich” by going to work in London (267). Memory, in the Romantic school of thought, is paramount to a person reaching enlightenment in nature so Michael’s and Isabel’s reliance on memory conveys the message that memory is important even to those who have been among nature for a long time.
        Clearly then, Romanticism is all over the place in “Michael.” Wordsworth effectively creates a pastoral poem where not only is the central character an embodiment of Romantic ideas and qualities, but many aspects to the story behind the unhewn stones relay an element of deep sentiment and powerful emotion. It is not difficult to see why this poem has been criticized for being too sentimental, but then again, one must admit that the Romantics had a point; feelings and passions are part of what make us human.