Yvonne Chung
Dr. Carpenter
Romanticism
14 November 2014
An Extensive Comparison of Shelley’s “To a Skylark” and Keats’ “Ode to a Nightingale”
        The Romantics, given their interests in the natural world, existentialism, and the human condition, glorified birds for their ability to produce, so freely, songs that seem to be devoid of all sorrow. Shelley and Keats, in particular, were so inspired by birds that they believed birds must have some kind of sublime power akin to nature. Keats wrote “Ode to a Nightingale” in 1819, and Shelley wrote “To a Skylark” just one year later, demonstrating the Romantics’ common affinity to examine what it is that sets these wondrous flying creatures apart from humans. The speaker in both of these poems finds himself in a state of hopelessness, each turning to a bird for solace. Both Shelly’s speaker and Keats’ speaker conclude that the creation of poetry is when humans are closest to the beauty and virtuousness of the birds, but while Keats absolutely dreads the more adverse elements of humanity, Shelley recognizes the limitations of unconditional happiness.
        The skylark in Shelley’s poem represents the powerful unseen force that many Romantics felt was present in nature. Shelley’s speaker clearly reveres the skylark. He immediately says to it, “hail to thee, blithe Spirit” (1), and later addresses it as a “Sprite” (61). He wants the skylark to imbue some of its power onto him so that he can, in turn, spread it to the world through poetry. The skylark is unparalleled by anything he has ever known. He thus compares it to four different things in nature that each make the world a more beautiful place in its own right. He first compares it to "a Poet hidden / in the light of thought" (36-37), who sings "unbidden" (38) until the world learns to sympathize. This poet has similarities with both the speaker and the skylark, implying that poets are closer to the skylark than are regular humans. The speaker, like the hidden poet, takes it upon himself to spread the skylark's happiness to the world. The skylark is also hidden, and sings its song willfully and unbidden, just like the poet. The speaker then compares the skylark to "a high-born maiden / in a palace tower" (41-42), who sooths her soul "with music sweet as love" (45). The parallels here are fairly obvious; the skylark is high up like the maiden in the tower, and they both make sweet music. Next, the speaker compares the bird to "a glow-worm golden / in a dell of dew" (46-47) who gratefully adds its color to the flowers and grass. The worm is hidden from view, as is the skylark, and yet both beings do their part, cheerfully no less, to make the natural world beautiful and good. Finally, he compares the skylark to "a rose embower'd / in its own green leaves" (51-52), deflowering until its scent is carried along with the wind. The rose is covered up by leaves, unseen, yet it still produces a sweet and lovely smell that the wind helps to spread all over the world. The speaker then goes on to say that the skylark’s beautiful music surpasses all of these things (60). He asks the skylark to teach us “what sweet thoughts are thine” (62), but he still questions whether we could truly be human without sadness, pain, hate, pride, and fear. In effect, he wonders whether we could appreciate, or even experience, goodness without evil. Shelley’s speaker wants humanity to be as happy as the skylark, but he also recognizes the limitations of being happy all the time. He says humans might never be able to come near the skylark’s level of beauty and goodness if we “were things born / not to shed a tear” (93-94). While Keats’ speaker does not ponder these questions, he admires the nightingale in a very similar manner, considering it a kind of divine power that surpasses all of humanity.
        Keats’ speaker wishes to escape his human life, to forget all the terrible things that plague humans, things that the nightingale has never known. He first tries to get on the nightingale’s level by the means of “some dull opiate” (3) and “a draught of vintage” (11), but when he finds that drugs and alcohol do not work, he says he will use poetry to be with the nightingale. Similar to Shelley’s poem, there is a theme of things being hidden. The wings of poesy are “viewless” (33), the speaker listens to the nightingale sing in the darkness, and he cannot see the flowers at his feet, but he guesses what they are by their scents (41-42). As he listens to the nightingale’s song, he says that he has “been half in love with easeful Death” (52). In other words, the nightingale’s song puts him at such peace that even dying appeals to him in that moment, as would anything else that would allow him to escape from the human world. Blissful immortality, such as the nightingale’s, would be the other option. He calls the nightingale an “immortal Bird” (61), because its song has been heard for countless generations before. Indeed, the word “forlorn” (71) inspires in the speaker the realization that he cannot avoid his humanity. When the nightingale flies off into “the next valley-glades” (78) and the speaker can no longer hear it, he questions whether he is awake or asleep. While Keats’ speaker shares many similarities with Shelley’s speaker, Keats’ is more reluctant to accept the transient nature of pleasure and the inevitability of death. He becomes lost and disoriented when the nightingale stops singing, uncertain of even his own state of consciousness. Furthermore, he does not recognize the potential downsides to immortality and perpetual happiness, only that neither he nor any other person can attain what the nightingale has, so he bids the nightingale “adieu” (73-75) and accepts his human fate.
        The speaker in both poems regards the bird as something sublime, as being, or having, some kind of power beyond human understanding. The skylark and the nightingale both sing happily and beautifully, without a care in the world. The skylark has never known “love’s sad satiety” (80), and the nightingale has never known “the weariness, the fever and the fret” (23) of the human world. Both speakers, then, hold a rather cynical view of humanity. Both seem to be going through a great deal of inner turmoil, tackling the questions: if humanity is plagued by all these terrible things, what exactly is our purpose, what can we learn from nature, and how can we be happier as a collective species? These are exactly the kinds of questions by which the birds are exempt. Shelley’s speaker says humans worry too much about the past and the future, and “pine for what is not” (87). He says “our sincerest laughter / with some pain is fraught; / our sweetest songs are those that tell of saddest thought” (88-90). Keats’ speaker says humanity is “where youth grows pale, and spectre-thin, and dies; / where but to think is to be full of sorrow / and leaden-eyed despairs” (26-28). He believes that to be with the nightingale, in its world away from the humans’, would be to escape all of these horrors. Both speakers are in a state of discontent with their own lives and they hope to overcome it by seeking to learn or become a kind of power that transcends anything humans could possibly hope to attain. Even so, one key difference sets the two speaker apart.
        The two speakers differ in how they react to the realization that their quest is an impossible one. As much as Shelley’s speaker wishes that humans could imitate the skylark’s carefree nature, he knows that the pain and misery we experience is what makes us human. Shelley, then, seemed to believe that beauty cannot exist without suffering. Keats, on the other hand, believed in a concept called negative capability. For Keats, this was the capacity of human beings, especially poets, to perceive open-mindedly the world around them. In other words, the world is both complex and ambiguous enough that anything is possible. Hence, Keats’ speaker hears the nightingale, and wishes tenaciously to “fly to thee” (31), against all rationality. He wants to live like the nightingale; immortal yet without the sadness that comes with humanity. When the speakers realize they cannot escape their condition, Keats’ speaker is shocked into a state of complete melancholy and confusion due to his prior state of hyper-perceptive vulnerability, whereas Shelley’s speaker ends on a more hopeful note of wanting to disseminate to the world anything he can of the skylark’s majestic qualities. In spite of these differences, the speakers come to the same conclusion: the creation of poetry is the highest form of humanity.
        Both speakers make references to poetry and use it as his mode of expression, suggesting that poetry is as close as humans can get to the unpremeditated beauty and virtuousness of the birds. Shelley’s speaker says to the skylark that its skill would be highly beneficial if it were in a poet’s mind, but that unfortunately, the skylark is a “scorner of the ground” (100). By the same token, Keats’ speaker uses poetry, rather than “Bacchus” (32), the god of intoxication, to imitate the nightingale’s happiness. Shelley’s speaker, being much more pragmatic than Keats’ speaker, wants the skylark to teach him half of what it knows so that he can put that beauty into words, in form of poetry, for the world to read. Put another way, Shelley’s speaker unlocks the skylark as a source of poetic inspiration, when initially it was this inaccessible force in nature. Keats’ speaker is likewise inspired by the nightingale, as he recognizes in the fourth stanza, that through the creation of poetry, he is already with the nightingale. He does not need to use alcohol or opiates to get to it, although he does say that alcohol is another source of poetic inspiration, since he compares alcohol to “Hippocrene” (16), the fountain of the Muses. It would seem that both speakers are afflicted with the condition of feeling all emotions with an unusual intensity, which, in this case, means their distress is amplified. Be that as it may, it is through these states of despair that they manage to create the compelling poems from which so many people have since drawn some kind of meaning by connecting them to their own lives.
        Though their speakers differ in disposition, both poets clearly believe that poetry is what liberates humans from their chains of sadness, and this is a sound belief. Nature has indeed been a great source of inspiration for artists and writers. Moreover, Shelley is likely correct in that we could not experience absolute happiness in the absence of all suffering. The sharing of pain is what brings us together and makes us stronger. Keats also has a point in that there are times when the natural world is so overwhelming that it seems better for us to let go of what we know so that we can appreciate our surroundings more fully and more openly. Sometimes, it can be soothing to escape the human world for the natural one, even if only for a moment. Both Shelley and Keats make well-founded claims about the capacity and boundlessness of poetry. This particular form of literary expression has been, and still is, regarded as a very effective and powerful vehicle of human connection.


Works Cited
Shelley, Percy Bysshe. “To a Skylark.” Keats, John. “Ode to a Nightingale.” Bloom, Harold, and         Lionel Trilling. The Oxford Anthology of English Literature. Ed. Frank Kermode and         John Hollander. New York: Oxford UP, 1973. 449-452, 538-541. Print.